RFC 32: Quilt Loader Plugins (#32)
QuiltMC/rfcs: loader/0032-loader-plugins.md

# Summary

This RFC describes plugins for the Quilt mod loader, and aims to describe the
purpose(s), functionality, and implications of such a system. At a high level,
loader plugins will allow developers to control the mod loading process itself,

> giving them access to powerful tools for defining, loading, and removing mods.

Reviewer: I don't see how you'd remove a mod with the API provided, it all looks additive?

better system for that will likely be implemented separately into Loader itself.

A loader plugin could be developed to load mods from instance-specific folders instead of the single shared mods folder.

By breaking parts of the mod loading process into various projects, we can keep
each repository focused on its own specific mission. This will allow for more
finely grained separation of responsibility.

# Explanation

The addition of Quilt Loader plugins will make Quilt Loader a plugin loader
first, and mod loader second. Much of the existing mod loading behavior will be
moved to one or more first-party loader plugins that are installed by default,
keeping only the bare minimum amount of code required for mod resolving in Loader
proper. Loader plugins will be capable of effecting the mod loading process by
adding/removing mods and even adding other plugins. Plugins will also have the
ability to open/create UI elements which can be used for as simple a thing as
prompting the user for confirmation, or as complex of one as writing a full-scale

> mod launcher as a loader plugin.

Reviewer: Refraining from the obvious `Curse/Overwolf` -> `Vanilla launcher` -> `Plugin launcher` -> `actually start trying to launch the game` criticism of someone making a mod launcher plugin, is there any encouragement for standardisation of things like UI elements/design? What existing structures/templates (if any, e.g the mod resolution error window) would Loader provide to plugins? Would a plugin which merely acted as a library for other plugins to use be appropriate or would that be better as a pure library that is shaded by plugins which want it?

## Application
Loader plugins are initially added from the classpath, allowing default loader
plugins for an instance to be added via the profile json. All plugins are then
applied in cycles. During each cycle, the following things happen:

> - Each plugin is given a chance to add any plugin candidates

Reviewer 2: Is this order defined? Does it need to be?

Author: Do you mean the order of plugin application? If so, then no, it is undefined and should not be depended on, similarly to mod load order. Within a cycle, each mod will receive the same inputs. That is, the mod list will not change between plugin applications in the same cycle.

    - Each new plugin added this way is given a chance to add any plugin candidates.

>       Rinse and repeat.

Reviewer: Can all plugins see (in classpath terms) all plugins which have loaded up to the point they run? Can they talk between each other directly? Suppose this is linked to the library plugin question

- Each plugin is given a chance to add any required or tentative mod candidates,
  rules, or options
- Quilt Loader will evaluate the sat4j tree
    - Each plugin will be given a chance to claim unsatisfied rules for resolution
    - Each plugins resolvers will be run sequentially

If any changes to the mod set have taken place during a given cycle, another cycle
will be run. Otherwise, the game will either launch or crash, depending on whether
or not all rules have been satisfied.

## API Surface

Below is a tentative plan of what the surface level API classes might look like.
Everything here is subject (and likely) to change, but helps provide a visual
idea of how developers might use this feature down the road.

<details>
    <summary>QuiltPluginContext</summary>

```java
/**
* Passed to loader plugins to define what actions they are able to take.
*/

> public sealed interface QuiltPluginContext permits QuiltPluginContextImpl {

Reviewer 3: I assume this is just to show this is not for implementation by users. Since loader does still need to support java 8 of course.

Author: It is, though support for Java 8 is another conversation that should probably be had. I don't think bending over backwards to support versions earlier than 1.17 should be a priority for us.

Reviewer 3: for the other issue but a note: supporting versions newer than 8 is possible but not the reverse if loader is compiled for java 16

/**
* The plugin that this context is for. This method is useless, it just indicates that every other method here has an 
* implicit paramater of "The Loader Plugin" for the UI / logging to use in some way
*/
QuiltLoaderPlugin plugin();

void addCandidate(ModCandidate candidate);

> void addCandidate(PluginCandidate candidate);

Reviewer 3: not sure why we need to have a distinct method for each. What I know at the moment is that a mod may contain a plugin, but a plugin may not contain a mod.

Author: A jar may contain both a mod and a plugin, and a quilt.mod.json may define both a mod and a plugin, but they are two distinct entities. For example, a mod candidate can contain bytecode transformations, while a plugin cannot. Plugin classes also must be loaded in time for the next cycle, while mod classes should really not be added to the classpath until we're ready to properly launch. That's why it made sense to me to have two distinctly separate methods here, but we may end up doing something totally different anyways.

/**
* Adds a tentative mod candidate which indicates that downloading / fetching a new mod will fix a rule somewhere.
* This tentative mod won't be kept around to the next cycle - instead the resolver is called to actually download
* the mod if {@link QuiltLoaderPlugin#canResolve} returns true after each plugin has been checked.
*/
void addTentativeCandidate(String group, String modId, Version version, CandidateResolver resolver);

/**
* Adds a rule to the current solver.
*/
void addRule(Rule rule);

/**
* Adds a LoadOption to the current solver. All existing rules will have Rule#onLoadOptionAdded called, and all plugins 
* will have ILoaderPlugin#onLoadOptionAdded called.
*
* If this is an ITentativeLoadOption then it will be removed at the end of the cycle, and handled by whatever plugin 
* added it.
*/
void addOption(LoadOption option);

/**
* Gets the metadata for a given mod.
*

> * Because the mods in QuiltLoader only reference fully loaded bods, this method can be used during the modloaded process

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Because the mods in QuiltLoader only reference fully loaded mods, this method can be used during the mod loading process
```

* to get the metadata for any candidates (tentative or not) that were present prior to this cycle.
*/

> ModMetadata getMetadata(String modId);

Reviewer 3: At this point in the loading process we are working with a case where multiple candidates for the mod may exist. Is returning one metadata correct there?

Author: There should only be one candidate for a given mod at this point. This method retrieves metadata for any mods that were added in a *previous* cycle, after sat4j verifies them and discards any superfluous candidates.

}
```
</details>

<details>
    <summary>CandidateResolver</summary>
    
```java
interface CandidateResolver {
/**
* Attempts to resolve a tentative candidate.
*
* @return an error message if resolution fails, null otherwise
*/ 

> @Nullable String resolve();

Reviewer 3: What would resolution do in this context? My interpretation here is things such as downloading mods or remapping a jar, such as with patchwork.

If it's the latter, would it make more sense to return a future?

Reviewer 3: And with a future, a failed future could be returned given resolution failing.

}
```
</details>

<details>
    <summary>QuiltLoaderPlugin</summary>

```java
/**
* @param <T> the types of resolver this plugin can resolve
*/

> interface QuiltLoaderPlugin<T extends CandidateResolver> extends  {

Reviewer 3: what does this extend?

*
* Should NOT invoke the resolvers.
*
* @return true if all of the resolvers can be called, false otherwise
*/
default boolean canResolve(List<T> resolvers) {
    return false;
}

/**
* Called if loader can't simplify this error down into any of the other error handling methods.
* @return True if this plugin did something which will solve / change the error in future,
*         and so loader won't ask any other plugins to solve this.
*         Loader will temporarily remove this rule so it won't be sent to #handleOtherErrors again in this cycle.
*         If this returns false then no rules will be removed, and instead loader will assume that
*         the error has been handled in some other way. (and it will promptly crash if you haven't)
*/
default @Nullable Rule handleOtherErrors(QuiltPluginContext context, List<Rule> errorChain) { return null; }

/**
* @param dep The dependency which is missing completely. If you can find a valid source for this then you should add 
*            it with {@link QuiltContext#addTentativeCandidate()}
* @return True if this plugin did something which will solve / change the error in future,

> *         and so loader won't ask any other plugins to solve this.

Reviewer: With no consistent plugin load order does this not open up the possibility for inconsistent loading behaviour depending on which plugin was fixing errors? Above you mentioned all plugins getting the same information each cycle; would it not be better to find out if there are multiple plugins which all claim to be able to fix an error, in which case you'd either have to pick one consistently or crash? Similar in a way to how cpw's ModLauncher voting doesn't allow all transformers to pass a cycle, at least one must be happy to run every time.

Author: > would it not be better to find out if there are multiple plugins which all claim to be able to fix an error, in which case you'd either have to **pick one consistently** or crash

This would probably be a better solution, but picking one consistently is the difficult part here. I suppose with loader plugins I wouldn't have much of an issue with adding an integer priority and determining based off that, but a more elegant (and less potentially abusable) system would be preferable.

*         Loader will temporarily remove this rule so it won't be sent to #handleOtherErrors again in this cycle.
*         If this returns false then no rules will be removed, and instead loader will assume that
*         the error has been handled in some other way. (and it will promptly crash if you haven't)
*/
default boolean handleMissingDependencyError(QuiltPluginContext context, ModDependencyRule dep, List<Rule> fullErrorChain) {
    return handleOtherErrors(ctx, fullErrorChain);
}

/**
* Called whenever a new LoadOption is added, for plugins to add Rules based on this. (For example the default plugin 
* creates rules based on the dependencies and breaks sections of the quilt.mod.json if this option is a 
* {@link MainModLoadOption}).
* <p>
* Most plugins are not expected to implement this.
*/
default void onLoadOptionAdded(QuiltPluginContext context, LoadOption option) {}
}
```
</details>

<details>
    <summary>ITentativeLoadOption</summary>
    
```java
/**
* {@link LoadOption}s can implement this if they must be processed at the end of the cycle in order to either be
* added as a normal LoadOption, or removed automatically.
*/

> public interface ITentativeLoadOption {

Reviewer 3: Nit: `I` class prefix doesn't align with what I'd say are the agreed but not concrete naming standards at Quilt

Author: These were the names Alex gave me, and they work well enough to convey the meaning for now. Very few if any of them are likely to make it into a final implementation 😄

abstract ModCandidate from();

abstract VersionLimits versions();

abstract @Nullable ModDependencyRule unless();

abstract List<ModLoadOption> valid();

abstract List<ModLoadOption> invalid();
}
```
</details>

<details>
    <summary>Rule</summary>

```java
/**
* A boolean expression, which controls the links between {@link LoadOption}s
*/
public abstract class Rule {

/**
* Invoked for every Rule by quilt-loader whenever a load option is added, in order to update this rule.
* For example {@link ModDependencyRule} uses this to add ModLoadOption to it's valid and invalid lists.
*/
public abstract void onLoadOptionAdded(LoadOption option);

/**
* Invoked when tentative LoadOptions are removed at the end of a cycle.
*/
public abstract void onLoadOptionRemoved(LoadOption option);

/**
* Called at the start of each cycle to encode this rule in sat4j.
*/
public abstract void define(IRuleDefiner definer);
}
```
</details>

# Drawbacks

All existing behavior can be implemented using loader plugins. As such, the largest
drawback may be the increased scope for the Quilt project as a whole, as we will no
longer be limited to mods specifically. This is less of a drawback and more of an

> organizational change that needs to be considered moving forward.

Reviewer 2: > plugins should be able to make clear when that happens.

Certainly, but we can't promise that plugins will actually be any good and report their errors properly.

> organizational change that needs to be considered moving forward.

Author: We can't _promise_ anything. I don't think asking plugin developers (most of which will likely be Quilt team members) to ensure they have understandable error messages is far-fetched. I don't think this is something we can address directly, but I can definitely add it to the RFC as a potential drawback.

None of them have been implemented into the mod loader itself, and as such this is
the first project to allow such liberal changes to the mod loading process.

# Unresolved Questions

Before loader plugins can be considered fully implemented, CHASM will need to be
functional so that all bytecode modifications can go through a single source of
truth.

For the purposes of this RFC, I did not go into the drawbacks of
dependency downloading specifically, as this RFC is interested more generally
in the idea of loader plugins as a whole. How dependency downloading is implemented
and other concerns regarding that will take place at a later date, in another RFC.

# Expected Response

Loader plugins have been one of the earliest features Quilt promised to deliver. As
such, I expect the community will largely be excited to see this feature
implemented. Projects such as [Bundle Installer](https://github.com/FoundationGames/Bundle-Installer) will be able to make use of loader plugins right from day one, and
I expect that we'll see a lot of similar projects that aim to make the mod

> installation process as easy as possible for end users.

Reviewer: You already have these now - they're called launchers! In fact we had them even with Modloader, people having trouble managing their mods is nothing new, nor are many of the solutions to trying to fix said troubles. I'd be sceptical of why having multiple similar but different systems is making the process easier than either providing a single uniform, centralised one or just pushing for better launcher integration in the first place.

   * will have ILoaderPlugin#onLoadOptionAdded called.
   *
   * If this is an ITentativeLoadOption then it will be removed at the end of the cycle, and handled by whatever plugin 
   * added it.
   */
  void addOption(LoadOption option);

  /**
   * Blames a single rule, causing loader to temporarily remove a single rule to move on to the next problem.
   * If another plugin is able to fix the error (by returning true from handleOtherErrors or related methods) then this call will have no affect.
   * 
   * @param errorDisplayer Only one will be chosen in order to describe the error in the main error gui, using whatever UI abstraction system we end up using.
   * @throws IllegalStateException if this isn't called during a call to {@link QuiltLoaderPlugin#handleOtherErrors(args)},
   */
  void blameRule(Rule rule, Runnable errorDisplayer);

  /**
   * Gets all currently present load options for mods with the given ID.
   * If none are present, returns an empty set.
   */
  Set<ModLoadOption> getModLoadOptions(String modId);

  /**
   * Gets all currently present load options.
   */

>   Map<String, Set<ModLoadOption>> getModLoadOptions();}

Reviewer 4: Typo
```suggestion
  Map<String, Set<ModLoadOption>> getModLoadOptions();
```
